---
layout: post
title: "Tweaking the jib"
date: 2016-08-06
---

We departed the quaint town of Trogir on the Danijela at about 14:00 hours with ample supplies: local cured meats and cheeses, a loaf of bread, TP, and a variety of beverages. The light rain and cool breeze were refreshing in early August after several weeks of heat and humidity in central Italy. As we departed from the dock, I poured two, two-finger glasses of Hendricks, no ice. "Here's to our next adventure babe!"  

We were a "crew" of three, my wife Diedre and I, and our skipper Vinko. He alone had sailing experience. He explained that the weather, although sub-optimal, may permit us to reach the island of Hvar some 20 km away, no guarantees. If not, he had a backup plan.  The sea would be rough outside the harbor, but it was important to get out of Trogir when we did as the weather was expected to get worse; we did not want to spend the first two days of our vacation sitting on the docks. If successful we could wait out the weather from Hvar. "Molto bene, salute...oops, I mean prva liga, zevali!"

As we left the protection of the bay, the winds picked up substantially and the sea was noticeably rougher. Empty glasses went back into the hull. We braced ourselves on the deck as Vinko deployed the jib. "It will provide some stability" he explained.    

The first bucket-full of seawater took me by surprise, temporarily blinding me, as a large wave hit the Danijela from the left. Vinko called out to me "take that rope on the left, three times around, clockwise, then over and through." His hand gestures made clear what I needed to do and I complied. "No, no! Each loop over the other!"  I quickly corrected my error to his satisfaction. "Now get that lever, there on the other side...turn!" I attempted to retrieve the indicated lever arm to my right to no avail. "You have to push to release." If I had to characterize my thoughts at that moment in a single word it would be simply "fuck", no exclamation mark. After a second or an eternity, I freed the lever arm and transported it to the winch. "Clockwise?" I asked. I heard no reply; the wind and sea spray acting on my rain jacket hood deafened me. I flipped the hood back just before the ship began to tilt, steeply, too steeply for comfort. I had to choose, so clockwise it went. "More! Keep turning!"  I put my back into it.  My right foot found something to press against providing needed stability as the boat heaved and rocked. I heard a faint command, "Other way! Other way! Turn it the other way!"  Shit, I should have turned counterclockwise. Another bucket of seawater doused my face. I reversed the motion, turning as fast as I could without losing my footing. I had no idea if I was closing or further opening the jib. After a minute or two, I heard "Okay, okay." The only thing left to do was hold on.    

As the boat tilted to near 90 degrees gravity transported Diedre from one side of the deck to the other. Her head and torso came within a foot of the white water streaming over the deck's rim. "Don't fall off the boat babe." I realized immediately that my attempt to lighten the mood with dry humor would not be perceived as endearing on this occasion. Saying nothing, she re-established a firm hold.

And there we remained for the next hour, Diedre and I, with white knuckles, braced against the bobbing and rolling, becoming one with the sea spray, salt accumulating on our foreheads, ears, and elsewhere. At some point we noticed the banging noises coming from within the hull. Inspecting the hull was not an option.

Looking out toward the open sea, frosted with cresting waves, it was clear that our plan to reach Hvar on this day was in need of revision. Vinko pointed, "we are going there."  In sight, some 5 km ahead was the island of Solta. There we would find protection from the wind in the harbor at Maslinica. "Hells yeah!" I said out loud or maybe just in my head. And after 30 minutes or so it was smooth sailing again, relatively speaking.  

When we arrived at Maslinica, it was hard for Diedre and I to gage just how epic our first sailing adventure had been.  Vinko reiterated that we had made the right choice, but there was no indication in his words, tone, or facial expression whether this experience was worthy of a script for a block buster movie like The Perfect Storm or The Poseidon Adventure, or whether this was just another day on the Adriatic in a smallish sail boat. I think the answer for Vinko was just another day.  

After settling into the port at Maslinica, we entered the hull. The door to the bathroom was on the floor, awkwardly wedged between the toilet and a wall. Its latch had come undone, and consequently it had been torn from its hinges, screws bent as they were ripped from the wood. So it was settled. For Diedre and I this was no ordinary adventure. We were finally on vacation. Excellent.  
