---
layout: post
title: "Time lost two ways"
date: 2017-06-19
---
At some point in my early twenties someone told me "If you didn't write it down, it didn't happen." I cannot recall who shared that pearl of wisdom with me, but I do recall it coming with a hashtag of sorts: the First Law of Astronomy. I have since learned that the same or similar adage has been circulated among academic circles in many different fields under a variety of different handles. Regardless of its origins, the rule seemed wise to me at the time, as it does now a half of a lifetime later, at least *prima facie*. Perhaps there is, or should be, some corollary to the Second Law of Thermodynamics hitching this folk wisdom to the fundamental laws of the universe. To be honest, I rarely apply this piece of wisdom in practice; it is astonishing to me that I even remember having heard it.    

Is there a penalty for violating this law, whatever we choose to call it? Leonard Da Vinci recorded his observations and ideas in notebooks with ink. His work was preserved, fortunately—i.e., it happened—but it remained undiscovered for so many years. It would have been a tremendous loss had those notebooks never been found, not for fear that the genius they contained could not be rediscovered, but because we would have never known those genius ideas had been discovered so very long before us.

Italy, Da Vinci's home for the better part of his life, naturally conjures images of the archaeological sites, statues, fountains, art, and architecture of western antiquity. The relicts of the past found in Italy are stacked on top of one another in sequence, from Etruscan time to the present, like a history book written page after page. It is fascinating to learn from archaeologists who dig slowly, carefully, meticulously down through the layers of earth to excavate things and resurrect the pages of this book, to discover what our ancestors knew and when they knew it.  

Ötze the Neolithic iceman lived more than 5000 years ago. What story did he write? With which media did he record his story? His body, tools, clothing, and tattoos were preserved like no others of his age, encased in glacial ice in the Italian Alps near Bolzano. His bones tell a tale of strain-induced degeneration. His copper axe is a chapter on its own, about humans skillfully making copper tools circa 3300 BCE. This date marks the beginning of the Bronze Age. The arrowhead, which entered his shoulder from behind, has the making of murder mystery. His tattoos may tell a story about the use of folk remedies for pain relief. The contents of his digestive track are the pages of a cookbook for the Neolithic diet.  

To know the history of more distant times, one must learn to map and read the rocks. Did you know that the Italian peninsula was lifted above sea level by tectonic forces some 5 to 10 million years ago? For 100's of millions of years some part of Italy's history was written slowly and quietly as sediments from above sank and accumulated at the bottom of a shallow sea. There is a succession of ocean bottom muck, materials derived from a nearby continental rivers, submarine landslides and mudflows, and even oceanic rocks called ophiolites.  

I vaguely remember my first visit to Italy back in 2001 (or was it 2002?). Was that really more than a decade ago? Modern Italy is, in places, full of hustle and bustle, things happening: headbanging figurines in the likeness of the pope rocking out in the gift shop windows; wavefronts of people in queues wider than they are long propagating toward cash registers to pay for espresso; cellphone users capturing virtual Pokemon, superimposed like animated Colorforms upon the physical world that we embody.  And here, in Italy, more clearly than anywhere else I have ever been, you can feel the time, our time, disappear. It can travel so fast that days feel like hours and weeks feel like days. *Espresso, read, explore/work, eat, nap, shop, chores, drink, eat, sleep, repeat*.  "Where the hell did this day go?!" Just ask anyone who has taken a holiday to Rome, Florence, Venice; they will surely tell you that time ran out before they completed their ambitious itinerary. But this is only one of the ways to lose time.  

We often take a break from time-traveling in Italy by catching a ferry across the Adriatic Sea to Croatia, specifically southern Dalmatia. Here the hourglasses' midriffs seems contracted by some yet to be discovered consequence of General Relativity. The duration between now and then vanishes. The concept of time dissolves. The boat rocks gently to and fro in this quite bay, as it seemingly has, as it will, forever, time invariant. This is a place where it is possible to become "in the present" like some enlightened yogi guru, but without having to fold yourself into an impossible pretzel.  

The islands in southern Dalmatian derive much of their beauty from their limestone composition. To say that the water along the coast is turquoise in color is incorrect. The water is crystal clear, nearly invisible. The color arises from the white limestone sea floor spotted with vegetation below. The islands are the imbricated slivers of the Adria carbonate platform, which has been folded and thrust northeastward since Eocene time. Here the pages of deep history are recoded in limestone rocks formed over hundreds of millions of years. They formed so slowly, so steadily that individual layers are hard to discern. In some places you can find radiolaria fossils or a T-Rex footprint, which can tell you something about the time period associated with this rock or that one. But otherwise the islands appear as one uniform, monotonous, beautiful, white mass of rock. The pages of this history book are in order, but its hard to tell which page we are on.  

In the evening, a fisherman's net, nearly 100 feet long, is draped carefully over the steep polished white limestone steps that lead from the coast into the dense red-roofed city above.  He is prepping his gear after a long days' work.  Across the bay, a web of limestone walls, built laboriously rock by rock over hundreds of years time, terraces the hillside. Pine trees along the coast shed their fragrant needles and invoke that feeling you get when camping in the mountains, while the gentle waves that rock the sailboat give the sea the appearance of obsidian.

A large group of young people congregate around midnight on a harbor peer, built of limestone blocks by Austro-Hungarians. Together they sing, sampling songs from the Beatles catalog, accompanied by an acoustic guitar. Flutes and other instruments--on the wind-instrument spectrum these instruments are somewhere between flutes and kazoos--fill the spaces between songs with jingles first perfected by snake charmers.  And I do not know if I have just arrived or have been in this place for days.
